---
layout: post-light-feature
title: Sensory Evidence Accumulation and Decision-Making
description: "What algorithms do animals use to transform sensory evidence into decisions?"
category: project
modified: 2014-01-16
tags: [decision making, decision-making, rats, sensory evidence, perception, dynamical systems, drift diffusion models, drift-diffusion models, carlos brody, brody lab, princeton, projects]
image:
  feature: Brody.jpg
  thumb: Brodythumb.jpg
---

Ideally, most decisions are made based on sensory evidence. For example, you decide when to brake in your car based on the sight of the car in front of you, the reading on your speedometer, and the sound of other drivers honking. But the quality of your decision depends both on the quality of the information you obtain and how you use that information. We study the latter - how animals accumulate and use sensory information to make decisions.

Our lab studies both rats and humans, but I'll describe how the experiments work with rats. The rat sits in a box and is faced with three nose ports. Each port has a sensor in it that allows us to tell when the rat pokes its nose inside. To begin the trial, a light turns on above the center port and the rat pokes his nose in that port. After a brief pause, a series of clicks play in left and right speakers. When the clicks are finished, the light above the center port turns off, indicating that the rat should make his decision. The rat's task is to choose the side with the larger number of clicks; he makes his decision by poking his nose into either the left or right port. If the rat is correct, he gets a water reward (he has been water deprived in the hours leading up to the experiment); if he is incorrect, he gets a time-out. An automated system records and stores all the information about the trial and hundreds of trials per rat per day can be run in this way.

Using this data, we fit a class of mathematical models called drift-diffusion models to the behavior of the rat. The resulting parameters of the model give us an idea of how the rat accumulates sensory information and transforms that information into a decision. In particular, the results can tell us how close the animals perform to optimality (i.e. the best they could possibly do) and, if they fall short, where the shortcomings arise.

For more on this paradigm, check out this (excellent) [paper](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/340/6128/95.abstract) by the Brody lab, which introduces this approach.

<strong>With: [Carlos Brody](http://www.brodylab.org) & [Tim Hanks](http://www.linkedin.com/pub/tim-hanks/7/575/952)</strong>